[Blog Post] Scaling a Dataflow streaming workload (#29619)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/blog/scaling-streaming-workload.md

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-previous-shuffle-total.png"
    alt="Streamed data size">

In the cases where data consistency is not a hard requirement for the ingestion, we can relax the BigQueryIO write mode to use an at-least-once semantic. By doing this, the implementation will avoid shuffling and grouping data for the writes, but this decision may cause a small number of repeated rows being written into the destination table (this could happen in case of append errors, infrequent worker restarts, and other even less frequent errors).

Adding the configuration to use `STORAGE_API_AT_LEAST_ONCE` write mode. We are also adding the configuration flag `–useStorageApiConnectionPool` to instruct the StorageWrite client to reuse connections while writing data, this only works for the `STORAGE_API_AT_LEAST_ONCE` mode and will reduce the occurrences of warnings similars to `Storage Api write delay more than 8 seconds`.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-resources.png"
    alt="Resources">

> Once we let the pipeline throughput stabilize we see a very similar pattern on resource utilization for the workload. The number of workers in use reaches 40, a small improvement compared with the last run. But, and as expected, the amount of data being moved from the Streaming Engine perspective becomes quite close to the data read from PubSub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When pipeline throughput stabilizes, we see a similar pattern for resource utilization for the workload. The number of workers in use reaches 40, a small improvement compared with the last run. However, the amount of data being moved from Streaming Engine is much closer to the amount of data read from Pub/Sub.
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-current-input.png"
    alt="Read data size">
<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-current-shuffle-total.png"
    alt="Streamed data size">

> Considering all these factors, we have further optimized the workload achieving a throughput of 6.4 MB/s per CPU core, a small improvement compared to the same workload when using consistent writes into BigQuery, but with a much smaller total on the streaming data being incurred. This configuration represents the most optimal setup for our workload, seeing the highest throughput per resource and being the option that streams less data across workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering all of these factors, this change further optimizes the workload, achieving a throughput of 6.4 MB/s per CPU core. This improvement is small compared to the same workload when using consistent writes into BigQuery, but it uses less streaming data resources. This configuration represents the most optimal setup for our workload, with the highest throughput per resource and the lowest streaming data across workers.
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-latency.png"
    alt="Streamed data size">

> One final look at the latency seen for our pipeline shows an impressively low latency for the E2E processing. Given that the main path of our pipeline has been fused in a single execution stage from reads to writes, we see that even at p99 the latency tends to be below 300 milliseconds at a quite large volume throughput (as previously mentioned around 1 GB/s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration also has impressively low latency for the end-to-end processing. Given that the main path of our pipeline has been fused in a single execution stage from reads to writes, we see that even at p99, the latency tends to be below 300 milliseconds at a quite large volume throughput (as previously mentioned around 1 GB/s).
```

## Recap

> Optimizing Apache Beam streaming workloads for low latency and efficient execution requires careful analysis, decision-making and setting the right configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizing Apache Beam streaming workloads for low latency and efficient execution requires careful analysis, decision-making, and the right configurations.
```

> Considering the scenario discussed in this article, it is essential to consider factors like overall CPU utilization, throughput and latency per stage, PCollection sizes, wall time per stage, write mode, and transport formats, in addition to writing the right pipeline for the workload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering the scenario discussed in this article, it is essential to consider factors like overall CPU utilization, throughput and latency per stage, `PCollection` sizes, wall time per stage, write mode, and transport formats, in addition to writing the right pipeline for the workload.
```

> Our experiments revealed that using the StorageWrite API, auto sharding for writes, and Avro GenericRecords as the transport format yielded the most efficient results. Relaxing the consistency for writes can further improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our experiments revealed that using the `StorageWrite` API, autosharding for writes, and Avro `GenericRecords` as the transport format yielded the most efficient results. Relaxing the consistency for writes can further improve performance.
```

> The accompanying [Github repository](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests) contains a test suite that you can use to replicate the analysis on your GCP project or with a different runner setup, feel free to take it for a spin (comments and PRs are always welcomed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The accompanying [Github repository](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests) contains a test suite that you can use to replicate the analysis on your Google Cloud project or with a different runner setup. Feel free to take it for a spin. Comments and PRs are always welcome.
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Scaling a streaming workload on Apache Beam, 1 million events per second and beyond"

> date:   2023-12-01 00:00:01 -0800

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date:   2023-01-02 00:00:01 -0800
```

However, you need to identify the key performance bottlenecks and make sure that the pipeline has the resources it needs to handle the load efficiently. This can involve right-sizing the number of workers, understanding the settings needed for the source and sinks of the pipeline, optimizing the processing logic, and even determining the transport formats.

This article illustrates how to manage the problem of scaling and optimizing a streaming workload developed in Apache Beam and run on Google Cloud using Dataflow. The goal is to reach one million events per second, while also minimizing latency and resource use during execution. The workload uses Pub/Sub as the streaming source and BigQuery as the sink. We describe the reasoning behind the configuration settings and code changes we used to help the workload achieve the desired scale and beyond.

The progression described in this article maps to the evolution of a real-life workload, with simplifications. After the initial business requirements for the pipeline were achieved, the focus shifted to optimizing the performance and reducing the resources needed for the pipeline execution.

## Execution setup

> For this article, we created a test suite that creates the necessary components for the pipelines to execute. You can find the code in [this Github repository](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests). You can find the subsequent changes that are introduced on every run  in the [`https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog`](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog) folder as scripts that you can run to achieve similar results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this article, we created a test suite that creates the necessary components for the pipelines to execute. You can find the code in [this Github repository](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests). You can find the subsequent changes that are introduced on every run  in the [https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog) folder as scripts that you can run to achieve similar results.
```

I think block quoting this creates weird formatting - https://apache-beam-website-pull-requests.storage.googleapis.com/29619/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/index.html#:~:text=the%20pipeline%20execution.-,Execution%20setup,-For%20this%20article

Author: Fixed.

All of the execution scripts can also execute a Terraform-based automation to create a Pub/Sub topic and subscription as well as a BigQuery dataset and table to run the workload. Also, it launches two pipelines: one data generation pipeline that pushes events to the Pub/Sub topic, and an ingestion pipeline that demonstrates the potential improvement points.

> In all cases, the pipelines start with an empty Pub/Sub topic and subscription and an empty BigQuery table. The plan is to generate one million events per second and, after a few minutes, review how the ingestion pipeline scales with time. The data being autogenerated is based on provided schemas or IDL (given the configuration), and the goal is to have messages ranging between 800 bytes and 2 KB, adding up to approximately 1 GB/s volume throughput. Also, the ingestion pipelines are using the same worker type configuration on all runs (`n2d-standard-4` GCE machines) and are capping the maximum workers number to avoid very large fleets.

Author: Done.

3. executes a UDF (identity function by default)
4. transforms the input format to one of the formats supported by the `BigQueryIO` transform
5. writes the data to the configured table

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/0-pipeline.png"
    alt="Example Workload">

The pipeline we used for the tests is highly configurable. For more details about how to tweak the ingestion, see the [options](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/blob/main/canonical-streaming-pipelines/src/main/java/com/google/cloud/pso/beam/pipelines/StreamingSourceToBigQuery.java#L39) in the file. No code changes are needed on any of our steps. The execution scripts take care of the configurations needed.

Although these tests are focused on reading data from Pub/Sub, the ingestion pipeline is capable of reading data from a generic streaming source. The repository contains other [examples](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/example-suite-scripts) that show how to launch this same test suite reading data from PubSubLite and Kafka. In all cases, the pipeline automation sets up the streaming infrastructure.

> Finally, you can see in the [configuration options](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-ptransforms/blob/a0dd229081625c7b593512543614daf995a9f870/common/src/main/java/com/google/cloud/pso/beam/common/formats/options/TransportFormatOptions.java) that the pipeline supports many transport format options for the input, such as Thrift, Avro, and JSON. This suite focuses on Thrift, because it is a common open source format, and because it generates a format transformation need (the intent is to put some strain in the workload processing). You can run similar tests for Avro and JSON input data. The streaming data generator pipeline can generate random data for the [three supported formats](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/streaming-data-generator/src/main/java/com/google/cloud/pso/beam/generator/formats) by walking directly on the schema (Avro and JSON) or IDL (Thrift) provided for execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, you can see in the [configuration options](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-ptransforms/blob/a0dd229081625c7b593512543614daf995a9f870/common/src/main/java/com/google/cloud/pso/beam/common/formats/options/TransportFormatOptions.java) that the pipeline supports many transport format options for the input, such as Thrift, Avro, and JSON. This suite focuses on Thrift, because it is a common open source format, and because it generates a format transformation need. The intent is to put some strain in the workload processing. You can run similar tests for Avro and JSON input data. The streaming data generator pipeline can generate random data for the [three supported formats](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/tree/main/streaming-data-generator/src/main/java/com/google/cloud/pso/beam/generator/formats) by walking directly on the schema (Avro and JSON) or IDL (Thrift) provided for execution.
```

## First run: default settings

> The default values for the execution writes the data to BigQuery using `STREAMING_INSERTS` mode for `BigQueryIO`.  This mode correlates with the [`tableData insertAll` API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/rest/v2/tabledata/insertAll) for BigQuery. This API supports data in JSON format. From the Apache Beam perspective, using the `BigQueryIO.writeTableRows` method lets us resolve the writes into BigQuery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default values for the execution writes the data to BigQuery using `STREAMING_INSERTS` mode for `BigQueryIO`. This mode correlates with the [`tableData insertAll` API](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/rest/v2/tabledata/insertAll) for BigQuery. This API supports data in JSON format. From the Apache Beam perspective, using the `BigQueryIO.writeTableRows` method lets us resolve the writes into BigQuery.
```

> For our ingestion pipeline, the Thrift format needs to be transformed into `TableRow`. To do that, we need to translate the Thrift IDL into a BigQuery table schema. That can be achieved by translating the Thrift IDL into an Avro schema, and then using Beam utilities to translate the table schema for BigQuery. We can do this at bootstrap. The schema transformation is cached at the DoFn level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our ingestion pipeline, the Thrift format needs to be transformed into `TableRow`. To do that, we need to translate the Thrift IDL into a BigQuery table schema. That can be achieved by translating the Thrift IDL into an Avro schema, and then using Beam utilities to translate the table schema for BigQuery. We can do this at bootstrap. The schema transformation is cached at the `DoFn` level.
```

This behavior happens because by default the [`BigQueryOptions`](https://github.com/apache/beam/blob/master/sdks/java/io/google-cloud-platform/src/main/java/org/apache/beam/sdk/io/gcp/bigquery/BigQueryOptions.java#L57) uses 50 different keys to shuffle data to workers before the writes happen on BigQuery. To solve this problem, we can add a configuration to our launch script that enables the write operations to scale to a larger number of workers, which improves performance.

## Second run: improve the write bottleneck

After increasing the number of streaming keys to a higher number, 512 keys in our case, we restarted the test suite. The Pub/Sub metrics started to improve. After an initial ramp on the size of the backlog, the curve started to ease out.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/2-skeys-ps.png"
    alt="PubSub metrics">

This is good, but we should take a look at the throughput per stage numbers to understand if we are achieving the goal we set up for this exercise.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/2-skeys-throughput.png"
    alt="Throughput">

> Although the performance has clearly improved, and the Pub/Sub backlog no longer increases monotonically, we are still far from the goal of processing one million events per second (1 GB/s) for our ingestion pipeline. In fact, the throughput metrics jump all over the time, indicating that bottlenecks are preventing the processing from scaling further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the performance has clearly improved, and the Pub/Sub backlog no longer increases monotonically, we are still far from the goal of processing one million events per second (1 GB/s) for our ingestion pipeline. In fact, the throughput metrics jump all over, indicating that bottlenecks are preventing the processing from scaling further.
```

## Third run: unleash autoscale

> Luckily for us, when writing into BigQuery, we can autoscale the writes. This step simplifies the configuration so that we don't have to guess on the right number of shards. We switched the pipeline’s configuration and enabled this setting for the next [launch script](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/blob/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog/3-ps2bq-si-tr-streamingautoshard.sh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily for us, when writing into BigQuery, we can autoscale the writes. This step simplifies the configuration so that we don't have to guess the right number of shards. We switched the pipeline’s configuration and enabled this setting for the next [launch script](https://github.com/prodriguezdefino/apache-beam-streaming-tests/blob/main/scaling-streaming-workload-blog/3-ps2bq-si-tr-streamingautoshard.sh).
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/3-autoshard-tr-overhead.png"
    alt="Translation Overhead">

When we inspect the `StoreInBigQuery` transform, we see that the majority of the wall time is spent on the actual writes. Also, the wall time spent converting data to the destination format (`TableRows`) compared with how much is spent in the actual writes is quite large: 13 times bigger for the writes. To improve this behavior, we can switch the pipeline write mode.

## Fourth run: in with the new (using StorageWrites API)

Enabling the `StorageWrite` API for this pipeline is straightforward. We set the write mode as `STORAGE_WRITE_API` and define a write triggering frequency. For this test, we write data at most every ten seconds. The write triggering frequency controls how long the per-stream data accumulate. A higher number defines a larger output to be written after the stream assignment but also imposes a larger end-to-end latency for every element read from Pub/Sub. Similar to the `STREAMING_WRITES` configuration, `BigQueryIO` can handle autosharding for the writes, which we already demonstrated to be the best setting for performance.

> After both pipelines become stable, the performance benefits seen when using the `StorageWrites` API in `BigQueryIO` are apparent. After enabling the new implementation, the wall time rate between the format transformation and write operation decreases. The wall time spent on writes is only about 34 percent larger than the format transformation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After both pipelines become stable, the performance benefits seen when using the `StorageWrite` API in `BigQueryIO` are apparent. After enabling the new implementation, the wall time rate between the format transformation and write operation decreases. The wall time spent on writes is only about 34 percent larger than the format transformation.
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/4-format-transformation.png"
    alt="Translation Overhead">

> After stabilization, the pipeline throughput is also quite smooth. This enables the runner to quickly and steadily downscale the pipeline resources needed to sustain the desired throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After stabilization, the pipeline throughput is also quite smooth. The runner can quickly and steadily downscale the pipeline resources needed to sustain the desired throughput.
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/4-throughput.png"
    alt="Throughput">

Looking at the resource scale needed to process the data, another dramatic improvement is visible. Whereas the streaming inserts-based pipeline needed more than 80 workers to sustain the throughput, the storage writes pipeline only needs 49, a 40 percent improvement.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/4-ingestion-scale.png"
    alt="Resources">

We can use the data generation pipeline as reference. This pipeline only needs to randomly generate data and write the events to Pub/Sub. It runs steadily with an average of 40 workers. The improvements on the ingestion pipeline using the right configuration for the workload makes it closer to those resources needed for the generation.

> Similar to the streaming inserts-based pipeline, writing the data into BigQuery requires running a format translation, from Thrift to `TableRow` in the former and from Thrift to Protocol Buffers (protobuf) on the latter. Because we are using the `BigQueryIO.writeTableRows` method, we add another step in the format translation. Because the `TableRow` format also increases the size of the `PCollection` being processed, we want to see if we can improve this step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the streaming inserts-based pipeline, writing the data into BigQuery requires running a format translation, from Thrift to `TableRow` in the former and from Thrift to Protocol Buffers (protobuf) in the latter. Because we are using the `BigQueryIO.writeTableRows` method, we add another step in the format translation. Because the `TableRow` format also increases the size of the `PCollection` being processed, we want to see if we can improve this step.
```

This time, the difference between format translation and writes increases significantly, improving performance. The translation to Avro `GenericRecords` is only 20 percent of the write effort spent on writing those records into BigQuery. Given that the test pipelines had similar runtimes and that the wall clock seen in the `WriteIntoBigQuery` stage is also aligned with other `StorageWrite` related runs, using this format is appropriate for this workload.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/6-format-transformation.png"
    alt="Translation overhead">

We see further gains when we look at resource utilization. We need less CPU time to execute the format translations for our workload while achieving the desired throughput.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/6-ingestion-scale.png"
    alt="Resources">

> This pipeline improves upon the previous run, running steadily on 42 workers when throughput is stable. Given the worker configuration used (`nd2-standard-4), and the volume throughput of the workload process ( about 1 GB/s), we are achieving about 6 MB/s throughput per CPU core, which is quite impressive for a streaming pipeline with exactly-once semantics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pipeline improves upon the previous run, running steadily on 42 workers when throughput is stable. Given the worker configuration used (`nd2-standard-4`), and the volume throughput of the workload process (about 1 GB/s), we are achieving about 6 MB/s throughput per CPU core, which is quite impressive for a streaming pipeline with exactly-once semantics.
```

## Seventh run : lets just relax (at least some constraints)

When using the `STORAGE\_WRITE\_API` setting for `BigQueryIO`, we enforce exactly-once semantics on the writes. This configuration is great for use cases that need strong consistency on the data that gets processed, but it imposes a performance and cost penalty.

From a high-level perspective, writes into BigQuery are made in batches, which are released based on the current sharding and the triggering frequency. If a write fails during the execution of a particular bundle, it is retried. A bundle of data is committed into BigQuery only when all the data in that particular bundle is correctly appended to a stream. This implementation needs to shuffle the full volume of data to create the batches that are written, and also the information of the finished batches for later commit (although this last piece is very small compared with the first).

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-previous-data-input.png"
    alt="Read data size">

> Looking at the previous pipeline execution, the total data being processed from Streaming Engine for the pipeline is larger than the data being read from Pub/Sub. For example, 7 TB of data is read from Pub/Sub, whereas the processing of data for the whole execution of the pipeline moves 25 TB of data to and from Streaming Engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at the previous pipeline execution, the total data being processed for the pipeline by Streaming Engine is larger than the data being read from Pub/Sub. For example, 7 TB of data is read from Pub/Sub, whereas the processing of data for the whole execution of the pipeline moves 25 TB of data to and from Streaming Engine.
```

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-current-input.png"
    alt="Read data size">
<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-current-shuffle-total.png"
    alt="Streamed data size">

Considering all of these factors, this change further optimizes the workload, achieving a throughput of 6.4 MB/s per CPU core. This improvement is small compared to the same workload when using consistent writes into BigQuery, but it uses less streaming data resources. This configuration represents the most optimal setup for our workload, with the highest throughput per resource and the lowest streaming data across workers.

<img class="center-block"
    src="/images/blog/scaling-streaming-workload/7-latency.png"
    alt="Streamed data size">

This configuration also has impressively low latency for the end-to-end processing. Given that the main path of our pipeline has been fused in a single execution stage from reads to writes, we see that even at p99, the latency tends to be below 300 milliseconds at a quite large volume throughput (as previously mentioned around 1 GB/s).

## Recap

> Optimizing Apache Beam streaming workloads for low latency and efficient execution requires careful analysis, decision-making, and the right configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizing Apache Beam streaming workloads for low latency and efficient execution requires careful analysis and decision-making, and the right configurations.
```
